### Numbers: _1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0_ = **pa re ci vo mu xa ze bi so no**

**lo** simply turns a verb into a noun but such noun has no number associated with it. The sentence

**lo mlatu cu pinxe lo ladru**  
_Cats drink milk._

is a general statement. Now let's specify how many of them are relevant to our discussion.

Let's add a number after **lo**.

**pa**

**re**

**ci**

**vo**

**mu**

**xa**

**ze**

**bi**

**so**

**no**

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0

**ro** = _each, all_.

Now

**pa mlatu cu citka lo plise**  
_One cat eats apples. There is one cat that eats apples._

We replace **lo** with a number and hence specify individual cats.

Note that we retain **lo** for apples since we talk not about specific apples but about eating any apples.

For numbers consisting of several digits we just string those digits together.

**re mu mlatu cu citka lo plise**  
_There are 25 cats who eat apples._

Yes, it's that simple.

If we want to count we can separate numbers with **.i**:

**mu .i vo .i ci .i re .i pa .i no**  
_5 ... 4 ... 3 ... 2 ... 1 ... 0_

**ro** is used to express the meaning of _each, every, all_:

**ro mlatu cu pinxe lo ladru**  
_Every cat drinks milk._

The number **za'u** means _more than ..._ (_\>_ in math), the number **me'i** means _less than_ (_<_ in math):

**za'u mlatu cu pinxe**  
_More of the cats drink._

**me'i mlatu cu pinxe**  
_Fewer of the cats drink._

**za'u ci mlatu cu pinxe**  
_More than three cats are drinking._

**me'i ci mlatu cu pinxe**  
_Fewer than three cats are drinking._

To say just _cats_ (plural number) as opposed to _one cat_ we use **za'u pa**, _more than one_.

**za'u pa mlatu cu pinxe**  
_There are cats that drink._

**pa mlatu cu pinxe**  
_One cat drinks. There is one cat that is drinking._

Putting **za'u** before **lo** means _more_, putting **me'i** means _fewer_:

To put it in short:

**lo prenu** = _people (in general)_

**pa prenu** = _there is one person_

**za'u prenu** = _more of the people_

**za'u pa prenu** = _people (two or more in number)_
