<!-- TODO: consider splitting into two lessons -->

### Bridi and jufra

**Bridi** is the most central unit of Lojban utterances. The concept is very close to what we call a proposition in English. A bridi is a claim that some objects stand in a relation to each other, or that an object has some property. This stands in contrast to **jufra**, which are merely Lojban utterances, which can be bridi or anything else being said. The difference between a bridi and a jufra is that a jufra does not necessarily state anything, while a bridi does. Thus, a bridi might be true or false, while not all jufra can be said to be such.

To have some examples (in English, to begin with), _Mozart was the greatest musician of all time_ is a bridi, because it makes a claim with a truth value, and it involves an object, Mozart, and a property, being the greatest musician of all time. On the contrary, _Ow! My toe!_ is not a bridi, since it does not involve a relation, and thus does not state anything. Both, though, are jufra.

Try to identify the bridi among these English jufra:

1. I hate it when you do that.
2. Woah, that looks delicious!
3. Geez, not again.
4. No, I own three cars
5. Nineteen minutes past eight.
6. This Saturday, yes.

Answers: <span class="spoiler-answer">
1, 2 and 4 are bridi. The rest contain no relation or claim of a property.
</span>

Put in Lojban terms, a bridi consists of one selbri, and one or more sumti. The selbri is the relation or claim about the object, and the sumti are the objects which are in a relation. Note that object is not a perfect translation of sumti, since sumti can refer to not just physical objects, but can also purely abstract things like "The idea of warfare". A better translation would be something like "subject, direct or indirect object" for sumti, and main verb for selbri, though, as we will see, this is not optimal either.

We can now write the first important lesson down: **bridi = selbri + one or more sumti**.

Identify the sumti and selbri equivalents in these English jufra:

1. I will pick up my daughters with my car.
    * Answer: <span class="spoiler-answer">selbri: pick up (with) &mdash; sumti: I, my daughters, my car</span>
2. He bought 5 new shirts from Mark for just two hundred euro!
    * Answer: <span class="spoiler-answer">selbri: bought (from) (for) &mdash; sumti: He, 5 new shirts, Mark and two hundred euros<Paste></span>
3. Since these concepts are so fundamental to Lojban, let's have a third example:
    * Answer: <span class="spoiler-answer">selbri: has done (about) &mdash; sumti: The EPA, nothing and the amount of sulphur dioxide</span>

### Constructing simple bridi
Now let's try making some Lojban bridi.
For this we will need some words to act as selbri:

<span class="definition-head">dunda</span> x_1 gives x_2 to x_3 (without payment)

<span class="definition-head">pelxu</span> x_1 is yellow

<span class="definition-head">zdani</span> x_1 is a home of x_2

Notice that these words meaning _give_, _yellow_ and _home_ would be considered a verb, an adjective and a noun in English.
In Lojban, there are no such categories and no such distinction.
**dunda** can be translated as _gives_ (verb), _is a giver_ (noun), _is giving_ (adjective) as well as to an adverb form.
They all act as selbri, and are used in the same way.

We will also need a few words to act as sumti:

<span class="definition-head">mi</span> "I" or "we" &ndash; the one or those who are speaking

<span class="definition-head">ti</span> "this" &ndash; some thing or event near the speaker(s), possibly pointed to by them

<span class="definition-head">do</span> "you" &ndash; the one or those who are being spoken to

<span class="definition-head">ta</span> "that" &ndash; some thing or event near the listener(s), possibly pointed to by them

See the strange translations of the selbri above &ndash; especially the x_1, x_2 and x_3?
Those are called sumti places.
They are places where sumti can go to fill a bridi.
Filling a sumti in a place states that the sumti fits in that place.
The second place of _dunda_, for example, x_2, is the thing being given.
The third is the object which receives the thing.
Notice also that the translation of _dunda_ has the word _to_ in it.
This is because, while this word is needed in English to signify the receiver, the receiver is in the third sumti place of _dunda_.
So when you fill the third sumti place of _dunda_, the sumti you fill in is always the receiver, and you don't need an equivalent to the word _to_!

To say a bridi, you simply say the first sumti (x_1), then the selbri, then any other sumti (x_2, x_3 and so on).

<span class="hspace"/> Usual bridi: _(x1 sumti) (selbri) (x2 sumti) (x3 sumti) (x4 sumti) (x5 sumti) (and so on)_

So, how would you say the following sentences in Lojban?

1. This is a home of me.
    * Answer: <span class="spoiler-answer">ti zdani mi</span>
2. You give this to me.
    * Answer: <span class="spoiler-answer">do dunda ti mi</span>

Now, how would you translate the following sentences into English?

1. ti pelxu
    * Answer: <span class="spoiler-answer">This is yellow.</span>
2. ta zdani
    * Answer: <span class="spoiler-answer">That is a house.</span>
3. mi dunda ti do
    * Answer: <span class="spoiler-answer">I give this to you.</span>

Quite easy once you get the hang of it, right?

#### Missing places

Rather than always specifying all of the sumti places, one could instead leave some of them blank, or unspecified.
For example, you could say _dunda ti mi_, meaning _(somebody) gives this to me_.
Maybe it's already clear from context who the donor is, or maybe you simply would rather not say.
Similarly, _mi dunda ti_ means _I give this (to somebody)_.

Whenever one of the sumti places is blank, it is assumed to be filled with the word _zo'e_, which means "something unspecified".
It is worth emphasazing that _zo'e_ **does not** mean "nothing".
Indeed, _mi dunda_, or _I give (something unspecified) (to somebody unspecified)_, is very different from _I give nothing_.

We have seen how to leave the first sumti, or the last few sumti, unspecified.
But what about intermediate places?
Well, we just use "zo'e" directly!

1. mi dunda zo'e do
    * Translation: I give something to you.
2. dunda zo'e do
    * Translation: Somebody gives something to you.

#### Observatives

One special class of bridi worth mentioning are the so-called _observatives_.
An observative is a bridi consisting solely of a selbri, with all sumti places left unspecified.
They were originally modeled after baby talk, and may be used as a rudimentary yet perfectly valid means of communication.
Presumably, observatives are the first type of bridi that a hypothetical native Lojban speaker would learn to use.

Literally, _pelxu_ means _something is yellow_.
In practice, more context would likely be needed to understand exactly why that is relevant.
Maybe you are the taking a ride with a friend, and the traffic light suddenly turns yellow.
Then you could yell _pelxu_, or _Yellow!_, to let them know so that they could stop the car.

<!-- TODO: variant bridi -->
<!--The order can be played around with, but for now, we stick with the usual form.-->
<!--To say I give this to you you just say mi dunda ti do, with the three sumti at the right places.-->

#### Connecting bridi

Multiple bridi after each other are separated by _.i_, which is the Lojban equivalent of a full stop.
However, it usually goes before bridi instead of after them.

<span class="definition-head">.i</span> Sentence separator. Separates any two jufra (and therefore also bridi).

The reason we haven't seen _.i_ in the previous examples is that it is often left out before the first bridi.

1. .i ti zdani mi .i ti pelxu
    * Translation: This is a home to me. This is yellow.
2. ti zdani mi .i ti pelxu
    * Translation: This is a home to me. This is yellow.

#### Exercises

Now that you have learned so much about bridi, it's time to attempt a few more translations.
You will need the following words, in addition to the ones you have already mastered:

<span class="definition-head">tavla</span> x_1 talks/speaks to x_2 about subject x_3 in language x_4

<span class="definition-head">pendo</span> x_1 is/acts as a friend of/to x_2 (experiencer); x_2 befriends x_1

<span class="definition-head">prenu</span> x_1 is a person/people

<span class="definition-head">mlatu</span> x_1 is a cat/[puss/pussy/kitten]

<!-- TODO: write some exercises -->

### A note on plurals and tenses

<!-- TODO: write this section -->
