### Plurals and tenses

<!-- TODO: write this section -->

### Bridi with missing places

Rather than always specifying all of the sumti places, one could instead leave some of them blank, or unspecified.
For example, you could say _dunda ti mi_, meaning _(somebody) gives this to me_.
Maybe it's already clear from context who the donor is, or maybe you simply would rather not say.
Similarly, _mi dunda ti_ means _I give this (to somebody)_.

Whenever one of the sumti places is blank, it is assumed to be filled with the word _zo'e_, which means "something unspecified".
It is worth emphasazing that _zo'e_ **does not** mean "nothing".
Indeed, _mi dunda_, or _I give (something unspecified) (to somebody unspecified)_, is very different from _I give nothing_.

We now know how to leave the first sumti, or the last few sumti, unspecified.
But what about intermediate places?
Well, we just use "zo'e" directly!

|sentence|Translation|
|--------|-----------|
|mi dunda zo'e do|I give something to you.|
|dunda zo'e do|Somebody gives something to you.|
|zo'e dunda zo'e do|Somebody gives something to you.|

#### Observatives

One special class of bridi worth mentioning are the so-called _observatives_.
An observative is a bridi consisting solely of a selbri, with all sumti places left unspecified.
They were originally modeled after "baby talk", and may be used as a rudimentary yet perfectly valid means of communication.
Presumably, observatives are the first type of bridi that a hypothetical native Lojban speaker would learn to use.

Literally, the observative _pelxu_ means _something is yellow_.
In practice, more context would likely be needed to understand why exactly that is relevant.
For example, maybe you are taking a ride with a friend, and the traffic light suddenly turns yellow.
Then you could yell _pelxu_, or _Yellow!_, to let them know so that they could stop the car.

### Variant bridi structure

It is also valid to position more than one sumti before the selbri.
In other words, the following bridi arrangements are all equivalent:

1. _(x1 sumti) **(selbri)** (x2 sumti) (x3 sumti) (x4 sumti) (x5 sumti) (and so on)_
2. _(x1 sumti) (x2 sumti) **(selbri)** (x3 sumti) (x4 sumti) (x5 sumti) (and so on)_
3. _(x1 sumti) (x2 sumti) (x3 sumti) **(selbri)** (x4 sumti) (x5 sumti) (and so on)_
4. (...)

|Sentence|Translation|
|--------|-----------|
|mi dunda ti do|I give this to you.|
|mi ti dunda do|I give this to you.|
|mi ti do dunda|I give this to you.|

### Connecting bridi

Multiple bridi after each other are separated by _.i_, which is the Lojban equivalent of a full stop.
However, it usually goes before bridi instead of after them.

<span class="definition-head">.i</span> Sentence separator. Separates any two jufra (and therefore also bridi).

The reason we haven't seen _.i_ in the previous examples is that it is often left out before the first bridi.

|Sentence|Translation|
|--------|-----------|
|.i ti zdani mi .i ti pelxu|This is a home to me. This is yellow.|
|ti zdani mi .i ti pelxu|This is a home to me. This is yellow.|

### Exercises

Now that you have learned so much about bridi, it's time to attempt a few more translations.
You will need the following words, in addition to the ones you have already mastered:

<span class="definition-head">tavla</span> x_1 talks/speaks to x_2 about subject x_3 in language x_4

<span class="definition-head">pendo</span> x_1 is/acts as a friend of/to x_2 (experiencer); x_2 befriends x_1

<span class="definition-head">prenu</span> x_1 is a person/people

<span class="definition-head">mlatu</span> x_1 is a cat/[puss/pussy/kitten]

Translate from Lojban into English:

|Sentence|Translation|
|--------|-----------|
|tavla zo'e do|<span class="spoiler-answer">Somebody is talking about you.</span>|
|mi do pendo|<span class="spoiler-answer">I am a friend to you. / I am your friend.</span>|
|mi prenu|<span class="spoiler-answer">I am a person.</span>|
|mlatu|<span class="spoiler-answer">Something is a cat. / Cat!</span>|

Now translate from English into Lojban:

|Sentence|Translation|
|--------|-----------|
|You are talking about me.|<span class="spoiler-answer">do tavla zo'e mi</span>|
|Friend!|<span class="spoiler-answer">pendo</span>|
|I am a person. You are a person.|<span class="spoiler-answer">mi prenu .i do prenu</span>|
|That is a cat.|<span class="spoiler-answer">ta mlatu</span>|

<!-- TODO: write some exercises -->
