### Description sumti

Okay, so now we know how to use _prenu_ as a selbri, and this lets us express sentences such as "I am a person" (_mi prenu_).
But how can we say "I am talking to a person"?
For that, we would need _prenu_ to act as a sumti.

This is achieved by using the words _lo_, as in the following examples.

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|------|
|mi tavla lo prenu|I am talking to a person.|
|mi dunda lo mlatu do|I give the cat to you.|
|mi tavla lo dunda|I am talking to the donor.|

You simply place a selbri after _lo_, and it takes anything that can fill the _x1_ of that selbri and turns it into a sumti.
So while _prenu_ means "is a person", _lo prenu_ means "someone who is a person", or simply _a person / the person_.
Similarly, _lo mlatu_ means "something which is a cat", or simply _a cat_ / _the cat_.
And _lo dunda_ means "someone who donates/is donating", or _a donor_ / _the donor_.

How would you say something like "The house is yellow"? It would not be _lo zdani pelxu_. For reasons we'll see later, this does not contain a main selbri. It is just a single sumti containing both words _zdani pelxu_.

In order to separate the selbri from any preceding sumti, the cmavo _cu_ is used. You can think of it as starting the selbri, the word immediately after it is always the selbri of a sentence.

If there is a pro-sumti immediately before the selbri, _cu_ is not necessary.

<span class="definition-head">cu</span> separates selbri from preceding sumti.

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|------|
|lo zdani cu pelxu|The house is yellow.|
|lo ctuca lo mlatu cu nelci|The teacher likes the cat.|
|mi (cu) prenu|I am a person. (cu is not required here)|

It is now time for you to attempt a few more translations.
You will need the following definitions:

<span class="definition-head">ctuca</span> x_1 teaches audience x_2 ideas/methods/lore x_3 (du'u) about subject(s) x_4 by method x_5 (event).

<span class="definition-head">nelci</span> x_1 is fond of/likes/has a taste for x_2 (object/state).

<span class="definition-head">gerku</span> x_1 is a dog/canine/[bitch] of species/breed x_2.

<span class="definition-head">melbi</span> x_1 is beautiful/pleasant to x_2 in aspect x_3 (ka) by aesthetic standard x_4.

First, translate the following sentences from Lojban into English:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|lo gerku cu melbi|<span class="spoiler-answer">The dog is beautiful.</span>|
|lo ctuca cu nelci lo mlatu|<span class="spoiler-answer">The teacher likes cats.</span>|
|mi dunda lo pelxu|<span class="spoiler-answer">I donated something yellow.</span>|

Now, translate the following sentences from English into Lojban:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|You are teaching the dog.|<span class="spoiler-answer">do ctuca lo gerku</span>|
|The cat is beautiful.|<span class="spoiler-answer">lo mlatu cu melbi</span>|
|I like the teacher.|<span class="spoiler-answer">mi nelci lo ctuca</span>|

### Skipping places

There are several ways to play around with the order of the sumti inside the bridi.
The easiest one is by using the words _fa_, _fe_, _fi_, _fo_ and _fu_.

<span class="definition-head">fa</span> Tags the following sumti as filling x_1.

<span class="definition-head">fe</span> Tags the following sumti as filling x_2.

<span class="definition-head">fi</span> Tags the following sumti as filling x_3.

<span class="definition-head">fo</span> Tags the following sumti as filling x_4.

<span class="definition-head">fu</span> Tags the following sumti as filling x_5.

Notice that the vowels are the five vowels in the Lojban alphabet in order.
Using one of these words marks that the next sumti will fill the x_1, x_2, x_3, x_4 and x_5 respectively.
The next sumti after that will be presumed to fill a slot one greater than the previous.

To use an example: _dunda fa do ti do_ &ndash; Giving by you of this thing to you. _fa_ marks the x1, the giver, which is "you". _ti_ is the thing being given, the x_2, which is "this".
Sumti counting then continues, meaning that the last sumti fills x_3, the object receiving.

|Sentence|Equivalent sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-------------------|-----------|
|fe mi zdani|<span class="spoiler-answer">zdani mi</span>|<span class="spoiler-answer">Something is a home to me.</span>|
|mi tavla fi do|<span class="spoiler-answer">mi tavla zo'e do</span>|<span class="spoiler-answer">I was talking about you.</span>|
|mi fi do tavla|<span class="spoiler-answer">mi tavla zo'e do</span>|<span class="spoiler-answer">I was talking about you.</span>|

### Reordering sumti

There is another mechanism for reordering sumti, which is also very useful for making description-like sumti (the kind of sumti with _lo_).
Consider the sentence "I ate the gift", which might be appropriate if that gift is an apple.

<span class="definition-head">citka</span> x_1 eats/ingests/consumes (transitive verb) x_2.

To translate this, it would seem natural to look up a selbri meaning "gift" before continuing.
However, if one looks carefully at the definition of _dunda_, "x_1 gives x_2 to x_3", one realizes that the x_2 of _dunda_ is something given &ndash; a gift.

So, to express that sentence, we can't say _mi citka lo dunda_, because _lo dunda_ would be the x_1 of _dunda_, which is the donor of the gift.
Cannibalism aside, we don't want to say that.
What we want is a way to extract the x_2 of a selbri.

This is one example where it is useful to use the word _se_.
What _se_ does is to modify a selbri such that the x_1 and x_2 of that selbri trade places.
The construct _se + selbri_ is considered one selbri on its own.

<span class="definition-head">dunda</span> x_1 gives x_2 to x_3 (without payment).

<span class="definition-head">se dunda</span> x_2 gives x_1 to x_3 (without payment).

<span class="definition-head">se dunda</span> x_1 is given from x_2 to x_3 (without payment).

Let's try with ordinary sentences:

<div class="translation-source">
ti se dunda mi (= mi dunda ti)
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
This was donated by me. (= I donated this.)
</div>

<div class="translation-source">
mi nelci lo se dunda
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
I like the gift.
</div>

Often, but not always, bridi with _se_-constructs are translated to sentences in the passive voice, since the x_1 is often the object performing the action.

_se_ has its own family of words.
Each of them swap a different place with the x_1.

|  |                |
|--|----------------|
|se|swap x_1 and x_2|
|te|swap x_1 and x_3|
|ve|swap x_1 and x_4|
|xe|swap x_1 and x_5|

Note that _s_, _t_, _v_, and _x_ are consecutive consonants in the Lojban alphabet.

### Exercises

Translate the following sentences from Lojban into English:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|lo se dunda cu melbi|<span class="spoiler-answer">The gift is beautiful.</span>|
|mi nelci lo xe ctuca|<span class="spoiler-answer">I like the teaching method.</span>|
|lo gerku cu pendo|<span class="spoiler-answer">The dog is friendly.</span>|

Now, translate the following sentences from English into Lojban:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|Cats are liked.|<span class="spoiler-answer">lo mlatu cu se nelci (= nelci lo mlatu)</span>|
|I find the dog beautiful.|<span class="spoiler-answer">mi se melbi lo gerku</span>|
|I taught about dog species.|<span class="spoiler-answer">mi ctuca fo lo se gerku</span>|

### Practice

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button nearby!

Beware that exercises loop indefinitely, so feel free to stop once you feel you've had enough.
And be sure to revisit exercises on different days, to benefit from the spacing effect.
