### Abstractions

So far we have only expressed single sentences one at a time.
To express more complex things, however, you often need subordinate sentences.
Luckily, these are much easier in Lojban than what one would expect.

We will begin with an example to demonstrate this:

<span class="hspace" /> _I am happy that you are my friend._

Here, the main bridi is "I am happy that X" and the sub-bridi is "you are my friend".
Let's look at the definition for the word "happy" in Lojban:

<span class="definition-head">gleki</span> x1 is happy/gay/merry/glad/gleeful about x2 (event/state).

Notice that the second place of _gleki_ can either be an event or a state.
This is natural, because one cannot be happy about an object in itself, only about some state the object is in.
But alas!
Only bridi can express a state or an event, and only sumti can fill the x_2 of gleki!

As you might have guessed, there is a solution.
The construct **su'u...kei** has the function of converting bridi into selbri (similarly to how **lo...ku** converts selbri into sumti).

<span class="definition-head">su'u</span> generalized abstractor &ndash; x_1 is <BRIDI\> as a non-specific abstraction of type x_2.

<span class="definition-head">kei</span> end abstraction.

So "X su'u do pendo mi kei" would mean "X is (a non-specific abstraction of) you being my friend".
It's usually hard to find good uses of a bridi directly as a selbri.
However, since "su'u <BRIDI\> kei" is a selbri, one can convert it to a sumti using **lo...ku**, yielding "lo su'u <BRIDI\> kei ku":

<div class="translation-source">
mi gleki lo su'u do pendo mi kei ku
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
I am happy that you are my friend.
</div>

<div class="translation-source">
mi djuno lo su'u do nelci lo mlatu ku kei ku
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
I know that you like cats.
</div>

<div class="translation-source">
do ctuca mi lo su'u lo mlatu ku melbi kei ku
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
You taught me that cats are beautiful.
</div>

### Specialized abstractors

In practice, **su'u...kei** does not see much use.
Since **su'u...kei** is a general abstractor, it will work in all cases &ndash; but be careful: if context is not sufficiently clear, the listener may have trouble figuring out precisely what you mean.
There are a variety of specialized abstractors, each conveying a specific, more precise meaning than **su'u..kei**.
The two most popular ones are **nu...kei** and **du'u...kei**.
There are many others, but we will only focus on these two for now.

#### nu: event/state abstractor

The construct **nu...kei** treats the bridi in between as an event or state, i.e. something which happens or could happen physically and/or spacially.

<span class="definition-head">nu</span> generalized event abstractor &ndash; x_1 is a state/process/achievement/activity of <BRIDI\>.

Let's see an example:
<div class="translation-source">
mi gleki lo nu do dunda lo mlatu ku kei ku
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
I am happy about (the event of) you donating the cat.
</div>

As seen in the definition of _gleki_, the x_2 can be either an event or a state, which means that filling it with "lo nu <BRIDI\> kei ku" is appropriate.
<!--Luckily, we see that **nu** is an event and state abstractor, and so it may be used with _gleki_ to indicate happiness about the **event** of you donating the cat.-->
<!--In the above example, the event of you donating the cat makes me happy.-->

Two more examples:
<div class="translation-source">
mi tavla do lo nu do ctuca kei ku
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
I talk to you about (the event of) you teaching.
</div>

<!--By using an event abstractor, it is clear that you are talking about an event instead of something else.-->
<!--One more example:-->

<div class="translation-source">
mi nelci lo nu lo mlatu ku pelxu kei ku
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
I like (the state of) the cat being yellow 
</div>

This last example is slightly different, as **nu** is now being used as a **state** abstractor.
In Lojban, the term "state" generally refers to an event considered as something that is either happening or not happening, with sharp boundaries.
<!--Instead of the _event_ of donating a cat, the cat is in a continuous _state_ of yellow.-->
<!--Therefore, I wouldn't like the _event_ of a cat being yellow, but the _state_ of a cat being yellow.-->

#### du'u: predication abstractor

The construct **du'u...kei** treats the bridi in between as a predication.

<span class="definition-head">du'u</span> predication/bridi abstractor &ndash; x_1 is the predication of <BRIDI\>, as expressed in sentence x_2.

Let's see an example:

<div class="translation-source">
mi djuno lo du'u do pendo mi kei ku
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
I know (the fact) that you are my friend.
</div>

As seen in the definition of _djuno_, the x_2 is a fact, which must be a predication.
Notice that "mi djuno lo **nu** do pendo mi kei ku" would not work, as one can only know facts/predications, not events or states.
<!--We see that _du'u_ is used with _djuno_ to indicate knowledge about the **predication** that "you are my friend".-->
<!--As a result, "you being my friend" becomes a proposition.-->
<!--To clear up any confusion, the translation to {mi djuno lo **nu** do pendo mi (kei ku)} is "I know the event/state that you are my friend".-->
<!--How can someone know an event or state?-->
<!--It is impossible and downright confusing.-->
<!--However, I can know a fact if it a proposition because it could either be true or false.-->

One more example:

<div class="translation-source">
lo prenu ku ctuca fi lo du'u lo zdani ku pelxu kei ku
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
The person teaches (the idea) that the house is yellow.
</div>

Note that, in principle, "the house being yellow" could be viewed either as a **state** (_lo **nu** lo zdani ku pelxu kei ku_) or as a **predication** (_lo **du'u** lo zdani ku pelxu kei ku_).
However, in the context of _ctuca_, only a predication makes sense, and hence only **du'u** is appropriate.
But there are also situations in which more than one abstractor may be valid in the same sentence &ndash; yielding subtle differences in meaning or emphasis.

Finally, note that the sentence above asserts "the person is teaching", but does not assert the nested proposition "the house is yellow".
It could be that the house is actually blue, and the person is teaching something untruthful.
On the other hand, placing _lo **nu** lo zdani ku pelxu kei ku_ anywhere within a bridi, without additional context, would generally imply, at least implicitly, that the house is (or was or will be) yellow.
(More precisely, it would imply that there exists at least one event of the house being yellow.)

<!--Thus, the idea that is taught is a proposition that can either be true or false.-->
<!--Instead of commenting on the state of the house, it can now be argued.-->
<!--Perhaps it is a blue house?-->
<!--Perhaps it is a yellow apple?-->
<!--Perhaps the house really is yellow?-->
<!--Either way, the primary bridi or "matrix claim" that "I am teaching something" by itself will always be true, but the "nested proposition" of _what_ I teach may be incorrect.-->

#### se du'u: indirect quotation

If you look carefully at the definition of **du'u**, you will notice that, besides the abstract predication itself (x_1), it also has a second sumti place for the text of the predication (x_2).
Hence, "X se du'u do pendo mi kei" means "X is the text corresponding to the predication of you being my friend".

This is often used for indirect quotation.
For a concrete example, let's use the word _cusku_:

<span class="definition-head">cusku</span> x_1 (agent) expresses/says x_2 (sedu'u/text/lu'e concept) for audience x_3 via expressive medium x_4.

<div class="translation-source">
do cusku lo se du'u do pendo mi kei ku
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
You say (the text corresponding to the predication) that you are my friend.
</div>

As **se du'u** is recognized as an indirect quotation, imagine quoting the text behind the predication.
If it seems confusing, try to substitute "that" to show the indirectness of the quote.
Also notice how _do cusku lo se du'u do pendo mi kei ku_ &ndash; "You say that you are my friend" is different from "You say 'you are my friend'" (which we are yet to learn how to express in Lojban).

<!-- Omitted as an attempt to make the lesson a bit smaller. -->
<!--Just like **du'u** the predicate can be true or false, but the primary bridi of "I say" by itself will always be true.-->

Final example:

<div class="translation-source">
mi cusku lo se du'u do dunda lo mlatu ku mi kei ku
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
I say (the text corresponding to the predication) that you donate the cat to me.
</div>

#### Choosing the appropriate abstractor

When should you use one abstractor instead of the others?

More often than not, the definition of the gismu will include the explicit abstraction of a place.
If not, ask yourself the following question: "**Do I wish to make the place an event, a state, a predicate, or the text behind the predicate?**" 

### Exercises

It's now time for you to attempt a few more translations.
You will need the following new word:

<span class="definition-head">nupre</span> x1 (agent) promises/commits/assures/threatens x2 (event/state) to x3 [beneficiary/victim].

Translate the following sentences from Lojban into English:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|do nupre lo nu tavla mi kei ku|<span class="spoiler-answer">You promised that (you) would talk to me.</span>|
|do cusku lo sedu'u mi nelci lo mlatu ku kei ku|<span class="spoiler-answer">You said that I like cats.</span>|
|mi gleki lo nu lo zdani ku pelxu kei ku|<span class="spoiler-answer">I am happy that the house is yellow.</span>|
|xu do djuno lo du'u lo prenu ku ctuca lo gerku ku kei ku|<span class="spoiler-answer">Did you know that people teach dogs?</span>|

Now, translate the following sentences from English into Lojban:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|Did you say that the cat is beautiful?|<span class="spoiler-answer">xu do cusku lo sedu'u lo mlatu ku melbi kei ku</span>|
|I am glad that you taught me.|<span class="spoiler-answer">mi gleki lo nu do ctuca mi kei ku</span>|
|What do you know that I did?|<span class="spoiler-answer">do djuno lo du'u mi mo kei ku</span>|
|What did you promise that you would donate to me?|<span class="spoiler-answer">do nupre lo nu do dunda ma mi kei ku <br/> _[or]_ do nupre lo nu dunda ma mi kei ku</span>|

### Final remarks

It may be helpful to memorize "se du'u" as a single construct, which indicates that what follows is an indirect quotation, instead of always mentally decomposing it into _se + du'u_.
Indeed, some people even write "lo sedu'u" instead of "lo se du'u".
This is allowed, since "se" and "du'u" are cmavo ("structure words") and in Lojban it is valid to concatenate arbitrary sequences of cmavo together, without spaces, as if they were a single word.
That is why "se du'u" is commonly seen as "sedu'u", and "lo nu/du'u/se du'u" is sometimes seen as "lonu/lodu'u/losedu'u".
We will learn more about the morphological classes later.

### Practice

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; smash that "Practice" button below!

Beware that exercises loop indefinitely, so feel free to stop once you feel you've had enough.
And be sure to revisit exercises on different days, to benefit from the spacing effect.

