### Terminator elision

<!-- TODO: insert lesson about tanru before this one (and probably checkpoint, also) -->
<!-- TODO: consider replacing the long example sentence with another containing only known brivla -->

Consider this sentence:

<div class="translation-source">
je'u mi djica lo nu le merko noi tunba mi <u>vau ku'o ku</u> jimpe lo du'u mi na nelci lo nu ri darxi mi <u>vau kei ku vau kei ku vau kei ku vau</u>
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
I do wish the American, who is my sibling, would understand that I don't like that he hits me.
</div>

Regardless of whether the above sentence is being understood, (it shouldn't, as it contains words we have not covered in these lessons yet) one thing stands out: as more complex Lojban structures are learned, more and more of the sentences get filled with _ku, kei, ku'o_ and other of those words which by themselves carry no meaning.

The function of all these words is to signal the end of a certain grammatical construct, like for instance "convert selbri to sumti" in the case of _ku_.
The English word for this kind of word is _terminator_, while the Lojban word is famyma'o.
They are underlined in the example above.

Note: The _vau_ in the above example are the famyma'o for "end bridi".
There is a good reason you have not yet seen it &ndash; stay tuned.

<span class="definition-head">vau</span> famyma'o: terminates bridi.

In most spoken and written Lojban, most famyma'o are skipped (elided).
This greatly saves syllables in speech and space in writing.
However, one must always be careful when eliding famyma'o.
In the simple example _lo gerku ku pendo_, removing the famyma'o _ku_ would yield _lo gerku pendo_, which is a single sumti made from the tanru _gerku pendo_.
Thus, it means "a dog-ish friend" instead of "the dog is friendly".
Indeed, famyma'o elision can lead to very wrong results if done incorrectly, which is why you haven't learned about it until now.

The rule for when famyma'o can be elided is very simple, at least in theory: you can elide a famyma'o, if and only if doing so does not change the grammatical constructs in the sentence.
In other words, a construct extends as far right as possible, until either its famyma'o or another word not allowed in the construct appears.

Most famyma'o can be safely elided at the end of the bridi.
This is why vau is almost never used &ndash; simply beginning a new bridi with _.i_ will almost always terminate the preceding bridi anyway.
<!--It has one frequent use, however.-->
<!--Since attitudinals always apply to the preceding word, applying it to a famyma'o applies it to the entire construct which is terminated. Using vau, one can then use attitudinals afterthought and apply them to the entire bridi:-->

Knowing the basic rules for famyma'o elision, we can thus return to the original sentence and begin removing famyma'o:

<span class="hspace" /> _je'u mi djica lo nu le merko noi tunba mi <u>vau ku'o ku</u> jimpe lo du'u mi na nelci lo nu ri darxi mi <u>vau kei ku vau kei ku vau kei ku vau</u>_

We can see that the first vau is grammatically unnecessary, because the next non-famyma'o-word is jimpe, which is a selbri. Since there can only be one selbri per bridi, vau is not needed. Since jimpe as a selbri cannot be in the relative clause either (only one bridi in a clause, only one selbri in each bridi), we can elide ku'o. Likewise, jimpe cannot be a second selbri inside the construct "le merko noi{...}", so the ku is not needed either. Furthermore, all the famyma'o at the very end of the sentence can be elided too, since beginning a new bridi will terminate all of these constructs anyway.

We then end up with:

<span class="hspace" /> _je'u mi djica lo nu le merko noi tunba mi jimpe lo du'u mi na nelci lo nu ri darxi mi_

with no famyma'o at all!


#### Selbri separator

When eliding famyma'o, it is a good idea to be acquainted with _cu_.
It is one of those words which can make your (Lojbanic) life a lot easier.
What it does is to separate any previous sumti from the selbri.
One could say that it defines the next word to be a selbri, and terminates exactly as much as it needs to in order to do that.

<span class="definition-head">cu</span> elidable marker: separates selbri from preceding sumti, allows preceding famyma'o elision.

Note: _cu_ is not a famyma'o, because it is not tied to one specific construct.
But it can be used to elide other famyma'o.

One of the greatest strengths of _cu_ is that it quickly becomes easy to intuitively understand.
By itself it means nothing, but it reveals the structure of Lojban expressions by identifying the core selbri.
In the original example with the violent American brother, using _cu_ before _jimpe_ does not change the meaning of the sentence in any way, but might make it easier to read.

<!--In the following couple of lessons, _cu_ will be used when necessary, and all famyma'o elided if possible.-->
<!--The elided famyma'o will be encased in curly brackets, as shown below.-->
<!--Try to translate it!-->

<div class="translation-source">
lo nu do cusku lo se du'u do nelci lo mlatu <u>ku vau kei ku vau kei ku</u> se djica mi

= lo nu do cusku lo se du'u do nelci lo mlatu <u>cu</u> se djica mi
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
That you say that you like cats is desired by me = I wish you said you liked cats.
</div>

### Notation

Sometimes, even though a certain famyma'o may be elidable, doing so may make the sentence more difficult to understand.
For this reason, we recommend exercising good judgment while performing famyma'o elision.
The ultimate goal is being understood, not being as terse as possible.

Throughout the remainder of this course, we may sometimes place famyma'o inside curly brackets.
This means that the given famyma'o could have been elided without changing the structure of the sentence, but we nevertheless chose to be (somewhat) explicit about it, either to pinpoint its placement or to help make the sentence more understandable.
For example, we could write _lo prenu {ku} cu tavla_ to indicate that there is still an implicit _ku_ to terminate _lo mlatu_, and that it is (implicitly) placed before _cu_.

### Exercises

It's now time for you to attempt a few more translations.

Translate the following sentences from Lojban into English, trying to elide as many famyma'o as you can:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|What did you promise to write?|<span class="spoiler-answer">do nupre lo nu ciska ma</span>|
|Are you happy that I promised to donate the cat?|<span class="spoiler-answer">xu do gleki lo nu mi nupre lo nu dunda lo mlatu</span>|
|I promised you that the person would say that the cat is beautiful.|<span class="spoiler-answer">mi nupre lo nu lo prenu cu cusku lo se du'u lo mlatu cu melbi kei kei do<br/><br/>Or: mi nupre fi do fe lo nu lo prenu cu cusku lo se du'u lo mlatu cu melbi</span>|

### Practice

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button near the top of the page!

Beware that exercises loop indefinitely, so feel free to stop once you feel you've had enough.
And be sure to revisit exercises on different days, to benefit from the spacing effect.
