### Relative clauses

<!-- TODO: double-check the position of all the "ku" -->

There is also another type of subordinate bridi: relative clauses.
They are sentences which add some description to a sumti.
Indeed, the "which" in the previous sentence marked the beginning of a relative clause in English describing relative clauses.
In Lojban, they come in two flavors, and it might be worth distinguishing the two kinds before learning how to express them.

The two kinds are called restrictive and non-restrictive (or incidential) relative clauses.
An example would be good here:

<span class="hspace"  />_My brother, who is two meters tall, is a politician._

This can be understood in two ways.
I could have several brothers, in which case saying he is two meters tall will let you know which brother I am talking about.
Or I might have only one brother, in which case I am simply giving you additional information.

In English as well as Lojban we distinguish between these two kinds &ndash; the first interpretation is restrictive (since it helps restrict the possible brothers I might be talking about), the second non-restrictive.
When speaking English, context and tone of voice (or in written English, punctuation) helps us distinguish between these two, but not so in Lojban.
Lojban uses the constructs **poi...ku'o** and **noi...ku'o** for restrictive and non-restrictive relative clauses, respectively.

<span class="definition-head">poi</span> begin restrictive relative clause (can only attach to sumti).

<span class="definition-head">noi</span> begin non-restrictive relative clause (can only attach to sumti).

<span class="definition-head">ku'o</span> end relative clause.

<span class="definition-head">ke'a</span> pro-sumti: refers to the sumti to which the relative clause it attached..

<span class="definition-head">plise</span> x_1 is an apple [fruit] of species/strain x_2.

Let's have a Lojbanic example:

<div class="translation-source">
mi citka lo se dunda ku noi plise ku'o
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
I am eating the gift, which (something is) an apple.
</div>

Here the **noi...ku'o** is placed just after _lo se dunda ku_, so it applies to the gift.
To be strict, the relative clause does not specify what it is, which is an apple, but given the context we can safely assume that it means that the gift is an apple.
If we want to be absolutely sure that it indeed was the gift that was an apple, we use the word _ke'a_, which is a Lojban pronoun (more on them later) representing the sumti to which the relative clause is attached.
In practice, _ke'a_ is often omitted for brevity when it would be in the x_1 place of the relative clause.
If context is sufficiently clear, it could even be omitted for other places as well.

<div class="translation-source">
mi citka lo se dunda ku noi ke'a plise ku'o
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
I am eating the gift, which is an apple.
</div>

To underline the difference between restrictive and non-restrictive relative clauses, let's have two more examples, this time with **poi...ku'o**.

<div class="translation-source">
mi citka lo plise ku poi do dunda ke'a mi ku'o
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
I am eating the apple that you gave me.
</div>

<div class="translation-source">
xu do dunda lo mlatu ku poi melbi ku'o mi
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
Did you give me the cat that is beautiful?
</div>

Recall that terminators are often elidable, so let's try to rewrite the previous sentences omitting them where possible:

|Original sentence|Simplified sentence|
|-----------------|-------------------|
|mi citka lo se dunda ku noi plise ku'o|mi citka lo se dunda noi plise|
|mi citka lo plise ku poi do dunda ke'a mi ku'o|mi citka lo plise poi do dunda ke'a mi|
|xu do dunda lo mlatu ku poi melbi ku'o mi|xu do dunda lo mlatu poi melbi ku'o mi|

<!--
|Original sentence|Simplified sentence|Translation|
|-----------------|-------------------|-----------|
|mi citka lo se dunda ku noi plise ku'o|mi citka lo se dunda noi plise|I am eating the gift, which is an apple.|
|mi citka lo plise ku poi do dunda ke'a mi ku'o|mi citka lo plise poi do dunda ke'a mi|I am eating the apple that you gave me.|
|xu do dunda lo mlatu ku poi melbi ku'o mi|xu do dunda lo mlatu poi melbi ku'o mi|Did you give me the cat that is beautiful?|
-->

### Exercises

It's now time for you to attempt a few more translations.
You will need the following new words:

<span class="definition-head">vecnu</span> x_1 [seller] sells/vends x_2 [goods/service/commodity] to buyer x_3 for amount/cost/expense x_4.

<span class="definition-head">skami</span> x_1 is a computer for purpose x_2.

<span class="definition-head">pilno</span> x_1 uses/employs x_2 [tool, apparatus, machine, agent, acting entity, material] for purpose x_3.

Translate the following sentences from Lojban into English:

|Sentence|Translation|
|--------|-----------|
|mi vecnu lo gerku noi melbi|<span class="spoiler-answer">I am selling a dog, which is beautiful.</span>|
|xu do citka lo plise poi melbi|<span class="spoiler-answer">Do you eat apples that are beautiful?</span>|
|xu do vecnu lo skami poi mi pilno ke'a|<span class="spoiler-answer">Did you sell the computer that I was using?</span>|

Now, translate the following sentences from English into Lojban:

|Sentence|Translation|
|--------|-----------|
|I am talking about the house that is yellow.|<span class="spoiler-answer">mi tavla fi lo zdani poi pelxu</span>|
|Did you like the computer that I donated?|<span class="spoiler-answer">xu do nelci lo skami poi mi dunda</span>|
|I promised to sell the computer that you donated.|<span class="spoiler-answer">mi nupre lo nu {mi} vecnu lo skami poi do dunda {ke'a}</span>|

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button near the top of the page!
