### Sumtcita

So far we have been doing pretty well with the selbri we have had at hand.
However, there is a finite amount of defined selbri out there, and in many cases the sumti places are not useful for what we had in mind.
What if I want to say that I am translating using a computer?
There is no place in the structure of _fanva_ to specify what tool I translate with, since, most of the time, that is not necessary.
Not to worry, this lesson is on how to add additional sumti places to the selbri.

#### Using **fi'o**..**fe'u**

The most basic way to add sumti places is with _fi'o SELBRI fe'u_.
In between these two words goes a selbri, and like _lo SELBRI ku_, _fi'o SELBRI fe'u_ extracts the x_1 of the selbri put into it.
However, with _fi'o SELBRI fe'u_, the selbri place is converted, not to a sumti, but to a sumtcita, meaning sumti-label, with the place structure of the x_1 of the selbri it converted.
This sumtcita then absorbs the next sumti.
One could say that, using a sumtcita, you import a sumti place from another selbri, and add it to the bridi being said.

<!--Note: Sometimes, especially in older texts, the term tag or modal is used for sumtcita. Ignore those puny English expressions. We teach proper Lojban here.-->

While it is hard to grasp the process from reading about it, an example will perhaps show its actual simplicity:

<span class="definition-head">fanva</span> x_1 translates text/utterance x_2 to language x_3 from language x_4 with translation result x_5.

<span class="definition-head">gasnu</span> x_1 [person/agent] is an agentive cause of event x_2; x_1 does/brings about x_2.

<span class="definition-head">mukti</span> x_1 (action/event/state) motivates/is a motive/incentive for action/event x_2, per volition of x_3.

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|mi fanva ti fi'o se pilno {fe'u} lo skami|I translate this with a computer.|

The x_2 of pilno, which is the x_1 of _se pilno_, is a place structure for a tool being used by someone.
This place structure is captured by _fi'o SELBRI fe'u_, added to the main selbri, and then filled by _lo skami_.
The idea of sumtcita is sometimes expressed in English using the following translation:
_I translate this with-tool: a computer_.

Here are a few more examples, this time using the words **gasnu** and **mukti**:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|fi'o gasnu do {fe'u} mi vecnu lo skami|You made me sell the computer.|
|fi'o mukti {fe'u} ma do ctuca|For what motive do you teach? &ndash; Why do you teach?|

<!--Note that **fi'o**..**fe'u** can appear anywhere...-->

A sumtcita can only absorb one sumti, which is always the following one.
Alternatively, one can use the sumtcita construct by itself without sumti.
In this case, you need to either put it before the selbri or terminate it with _ku_.
This functions as if the sumtcita had the word _zo'e_ as the sumti.
Here are some examples:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|fi'o mukti {fe'u} ku mi ctuca|I teach for a reason.|
|mi fi'o gasnu fe'u vecnu lo skami|Someone made me sell the computer.|

<!-- in fact, we will not even cover fi'o..fe'u in exercises. but it is important for... -->

Actually, **fi'o**..**fe'u** is not used very often despite its flexibility.
In fact, **fi'o**..**fe'u** will not even be covered in exercises.
Why are we teaching it then, you might ask?
Well, it is required for understanding **BAI**.

#### Using **BAI**

**BAI** is a class of Lojban words, which in themselves act as sumtcita.
They are used extremely often.

An example is _mu'i_, the **BAI** for _mukti_.
Grammatically, _mu'i_ is the same as _fi'o mukti fe'u_.
Thus, the above examples could be reduced to:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|mu'i ma do ctuca|Why do you teach?|
|mu'i ku mi ctuca|I teach for a reason.|

The **BAI** for _pilno_ and _gasnu_ are _pi'o_ and _gau_, respectively.

Here are the definitions:

<span class="definition-head">pi'o</span> pilno modal; 1st place used by...

<span class="definition-head">mu'i</span> mukti modal; 1st place because of motive...

<span class="definition-head">gau</span> gasnu modal; 1st place agent/actor case tag with active agent...

Using this knowledge, translate the following sentences from Lojban into English:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|gau do mi vecnu lo skami|<span class="spoiler-answer">You made me sell the computer.</span>|
|mi fanva ti se pi'o lo skami|<span class="spoiler-answer">I translate this with a computer.</span>|
|mi tavla lo fanva be gau do|<span class="spoiler-answer">I am talking to the one-who-you-made-translate. &ndash; I am talking to the one who translated because of you.</span>|

The last example shows how BAI can be used together with _be_.
Indeed, _be_ and _bei_ can be used not only to bind sumti to selbri, but also to bind sumtcita to selbri.

Now, translate the following sentences from English into Lojban:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|Someone made me sell the computer.|<span class="spoiler-answer">mi gau vecnu lo skami</span>|.
|I am selling computers used by you.|<span class="spoiler-answer">mi vecnu lo skami be sepi'o do</span>|.

Note that it is valid to join _se_ and _pi'o_ together as a single word, forming _sepi'o_, because both _se_ and _pi'o_ are cmavo (which we'll learn more about later).
This is similar to how we joined _se_ and _du'u_ when studying abstractions.
Indeed, it may be simpler to memorize the entire expression _sepi'o_ as "using tool".
Similarly, _mu'i_ may be glossed as (one of the multiple, albeit related, meanings of) "because", and _gau_ may be glossed as "with-agent" 

There are around 60 **BAI**, and a lot of these are very useful indeed.
Furtermore, **BAI** can also be converted with _se_ and friends, as we saw for _pi'o_, which results in a great deal more BAI.
We eventually intend to create a [deck](/decks) just for **BAI**.
Stay tuned!

<!-- TODO: link to deck -->

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button near the top of the page!
