### Tanru

Let's focus more in the selbri structure for now. Recall selbri has sumti places, that is: x_1 something x_2 something x_3 (and so on). 
The simplest type of selbri is the one formed by a single word: a brivla. For instance, **zdani**, **pelxu** are all examples of brivla.
When one combines two brivlas, the result will be a tanru (which is a kind of selbri).
An example: **pelxu zdani** would be a **zdani** which is somehow **pelxu**-like or **pelxu**-related.

### Simple tanru 

We'll focus in a simple kind of tanru: two brivla tanru.

<span class="definition-head">pelxu zdani</span> x_1 is a nest/house/lair/den/[home] (which is somehow **pelxu**-related) of/for x_2.  (event/state).

The connection between **pelxu** and **zdani** could be any.
In the example, the houses are somehow related to yellow, perhaps, they were painted yellow.
Because the connection can be any, even silly things, *there's no english equivalent of a tanru*.

Take another example:

<span class="definition-head">gerku zdani</span> x_1 is a nest/house/lair/den/[home] (which is somehow **gerku**-related) of/for x_2.  (event/state).

 In this examples, dogs are somehow connected to houses. Perhaps it is a dog's house.
 The order of the words is pretty important:
 
 <span class="definition-head">zdani gerku</span> x_1 is a dog/canine/[bitch] (which is somehow **zdani**-related of species/breed) x_2. .  (event/state).

While **gerku zdani** is a house, **zdani gerku** is a dog, therefore, the order is very important.
What **zdani gerku** means, you ask? Perhaps the dog has the shape of a house.
Perhaps the dog is homely, in the sense that it really dislikes leaving a house (perhaps the owner's house).


### Some examples 

Because the connection of the tanru can be any, what it actually means is entirely open to interpretation, and therefore, usually it is guessed from context.

<div class="translation-source">
ti melbi gerku
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
This is a beautiful dog
</div>


Furthermore, because the tanru is a selbri, it can be converted to sumti by the usual **lo**..**ku** construct.

<div class="translation-source">
mi nelci lo melbi mlatu ku
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
I like (the) beautiful cat(s)
</div>

Besides, because **se {brivla}** is a selbri, one can use reordering with **se** and friends, to form tanru.

<div class="translation-source">
lo pelxu se dunda ku melbi mi
</div>
<div class="translation-target">
I find the yellow/golden gift to be beautiful.
</div>


### Tanru vs Filling sumti places

It is important to realize the difference in meaning between a tanru, and actually filling a sumti place.

|Sentence|Translation|
|--------|-----------|
ti zdani lo prenu ku|This is a house of/for a person.|
|ti prenu zdani|This is a house somehow related to a person <br/> [perhaps] This is a house of/for a person <br/> [perhaps] This is a house that has personality|

Notice, in the first one, we know for sure that it is a person's house (or a house for some person), because "person" actually filled the x2 sumti place for **zdani**.
In the tanru example, there is no way to be certain: the relation could be any.
It could be that this is a person's house.
It could be the house has a personality.
It could be the house has the shape of a person.
It could mean anything, as long as it has to do with person/personality.

In other words, if you can to be precise, if you can fill the sumti, do it, instead of constructing a tanru.
Unless you want to purposely be vague... or unless context leaves the meaning of a tanru very clear.

### Exercises

Your turn. Try to translate the following sentences.
Try to use common-sense to translate the tanru constructs, but keep in mind that alternative interpretations are perfectly valid as well.

<span class="definition-head">sutra</span> x1 is fast/swift/quick/hastes/rapid at doing/being/bringing about x2 (event/state).

<span class="definition-head">lojbo</span> x1 reflects [Loglandic]/Lojbanic language/culture/nationality/community in aspect x2. 

|Sentence|Translation|
|--------|-----------|
|do sutra tavla fo lo lojbo ku|<span class="spoiler-answer">You speak (the) lojban language fast</span>|
|mi dunda lo pelxu zdani ku |<span class="spoiler-answer">I donate (the) yellow house(s)</span>|
|mi nelci lo sutra mlatu ku|<span class="spoiler-answer">I like (the) fast cat(s)</span>|
|do mlatu ctuca lo prenu ku|<span class="spoiler-answer">You teach (the) people in a cat-like manner</span>|
|do pelxu ciska|<span class="spoiler-answer">You write in a yellow-like manner (perhaps using yellow ink)</span>|
|ti sutra se mlatu|<span class="spoiler-answer">This is a fast cat species</span>|

Now, translate the following sentences from English into Lojban:


|Sentence|Translation|
|--------|-----------|
|This is a lojbanic cat|<span class="spoiler-answer">ti lojbo mlatu</span>|
|I write in a lojbanic way.|<span class="spoiler-answer">mi lojbo ciska</span>|
|You give/donate a beautiful house|<span class="spoiler-answer">do dunda lo melbi zdani ku</span>|
|A talking-friend writes something fast|<span class="spoiler-answer">lo tavla pendo ku sutra ciska zo'e</span>|
|I like the yellow gift|<span class="spoiler-answer">mi nelci lo pelxu se dunda ku</span>|

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button near the top of the page!
