### Quotations 1

One of the key design features of Lojban is that it's supposed to be audio-visual isomorphic, meaning that everything expressed in text should also be expressed in speech and vice versa.
Therefore, there cannot be any punctuation which is not pronounced.
This means that Lojban has a wide range of words to quote other words.
All Lojban quotes take some input of text and converts it to a sumti.
Let's begin with the most simple:

<span class="definition-head">lu</span> Quote word: begin quote of grammatical Lojban content.

<span class="definition-head">li'u</span> Quote word: end quote of grammatical Lojban content.

The text inside this construct must by itself be grammatical.
It can quote almost all Lojban words with just a few exceptions, most notably, obviously, _li'u_.
Let's see some examples:

|Sentence|Translation|
|--------|-----------|
|do cusku lu mi nelci lo mlatu {li'u}|<span class="spoiler-answer">You said "I like cats".</span>|
|mi ciska lu vecnu lo skami {li'u}|<span class="spoiler-answer">I wrote "selling computers".</span>|
|mi fanva lu lo gerku cu melbi {li'u}|<span class="spoiler-answer">I translated "dogs are beautiful".</span>|

Note the difference between _do cusku lu mi nelci lo mlatu_ &ndash; "You said 'I like cats'", and _do cusku lo se du'u mi nelci lo mlatu_ &ndash; "You said that I like cats".
In the first case, it is _you_ who likes cats; in the second case, it is _me_.

These quote words, _lu_ and _li'u_, cannot quote ungrammatical text.
In future lessons, we will learn new words for quoting ungrammatical text.

What if you want to quote a single word?
For these cases, Lojban has a shorter syntax involving the word _zo_, which always quotes the next Lojban word, no matter what it is.
It's pretty handy.

<span class="definition-head">zo</span> Quote word: quotes next Lojban word, no matter what.

Here are some examples:

|Sentence|Translation|
|--------|-----------|
|do ciska zo mlatu|<span class="spoiler-answer">You wrote "cats" (or, well, "catness" or "being a cat", if that makes sense).</span>|
|mi cusku zo lu|<span class="spoiler-answer">I said "lu".</span>|
|fanva zo bangu fu ma|<span class="spoiler-answer">How does one translate "language"? &ndash; What is the translation of "language"?</span>|
|ma cusku zo zo|<span class="spoiler-answer">Who said "zo"?</span>|

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button near the top of the page!
