### Relative phrases

In a previous lesson, we saw how to associate "name" and "I", forming "my name", using _be_: _lo cmene be mi_.
But this only works because the x_2 of _cmene_ is the person who goes by that name.
Similarly for "my language", or _lo bangu be mi_, where the x_2 of _bangu_ is the language user.

But what about other kinds of associations?
How would you say "my cat"?
Certainly not _lo mlatu be mi_, because that would mean "the cat of the species I/me", which does not make sense.

It turns out that Lojban has other words for association, which do not rely on the sumti places.
Here are the definitions:

<span class="definition-head">ne</span> non-restrictive relative phrase. "which is associated with..."

<span class="definition-head">pe</span> restrictive relative phrase. "which is associated with..."

<span class="definition-head">po</span> possesive relative phrase. "which is specific to..."

<span class="definition-head">po'e</span> inalienable relative phrase. "which belongs to..."

Wow, so many words!
What's the difference between them?

<!--Let's concentrate on the first two, _ne_ and _pe_.-->
Consider the first two, _ne_ and _pe_.
Both indicate loose association only, like saying "my chair" about a chair which you sit on.
It's not really yours, but has something do to with you.
A more intimate connection can be established with _po_, which makes the association unique and binding to a person, as in my car for a car that you actually own.
The last kind of associator is _po'e_, which makes a so-called "inalienable" bond between sumti, meaning that the bond is innate between the two sumti.
Some examples could be "my mother", "my arm" or "my home country"; none of these "possesions" can be lost (even if you saw off your arm, it's still your arm), and are therefore inalienable.
Almost all of the times a _po'e_ is appropriate, though, the x_2 of the selbri contains the one to which the x_1 is connected, so _be_ is better.
As a result, _po'e_ does not see much use.

Finally, the difference between _ne_ and _pe_ is that _ne_ indicates non-restrictive association, while _pe_ indicates restrictive association.
This perfectly mirrors the distinction between _noi_ and _poi_, which we studied in a previous lesson.

Let's see a few examples:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|lo gerku ne mi cu melbi|The dog, which I am associated with, is beautiful. &ndash; My dog is beautiful.|
|lo gerku pe mi cu melbi|The dog that I am associated with is beautiful. &ndash; My dog is beautiful.|
|lo gerku po mi cu melbi|The dog that is mine is beautiful. &ndash; My dog is beautiful.|

Note that the colloquial translations of these three sentences, "my dog is beautiful", is the same in English (granted, the first two could be a bit misleading in the absense of further context).
The first two sentences could be used whether you actually own the dog or were just taking it for a walk.
The third sentence more precisely conveys that the dog is strongly associated with you; perhaps you own it.

Note that _po_ does not literally imply ownership, but merely some kind of association which is stronger than _pe_.
It is just a matter of degree, and everything is relative.
As always, context is key.

Finally, there is a more concise way of writing some relative phrases.
Instead of _lo SELBRI pe SUMTI_, one may instead write _lo SUMTI SELBRI_.
For example, _lo gerku pe mi_ becomes _lo mi gerku_.
Similarly _lo lo prenu ku gerku_ becomes _lo gerku pe lo prenu_, meaning "the dog of the person".
This second example is a bit difficult to read, so it is generally avoided.
But when the sumti is simple, such as "mi", the alternative structure is often used.

### Practice

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button near the top of the page!

Beware that exercises loop indefinitely, so feel free to stop once you feel you've had enough.
And be sure to revisit exercises on different days, to benefit from the spacing effect.
