### Logical connectives 1

<!--
This lesson is still under construction.
Please check back in a few weeks.
-->

<!--
Lojban is said to be a logical language.
So, well, it gotta have some logical connectives, right?
Surprise, surprise, turns out it does!
-->

If you ask a Lojbanist: Do you want milk or sugar in your coffee? She'll answer: Correct.

Witty as this joke might be, it illustrates a weird property of the English way of asking this question.
It is phrased as a true/false question, but it really isn't.
In Lojban, we can't have this kind of inconsistency, and so we must find another way of asking this kind of question.
If you think about it, it's pretty hard to find a good and easy way, and it seems Lojban has picked a good way instead of an easy way.

To explain it, let us take two separate bridi:

1. I like milk in my coffee.
2. I like sugar in my coffee.

Both of these bridi can have the state true or false. This yields four combinations of which bridi is/are true:

* A) 1 and 2
* B) 1 but not 2
* C) 2 but not 1
* D) neither 1 nor 2

I, in actuality, like milk in my coffee, and I'm indifferent as to whether there is sugar in it or not.
Therefore, my preference can be written A) true B) true C) false D) false, since both A and B yields true for me, but neither C nor D does.

A more compact way of writing my coffee preferences would be TTFF for true, true, false, false.
Similarly, a person liking his coffee black and unsweetened would have a coffee preference of FFFT.
This combination of "true" and "false" is called a truth function, in this case for the two statements "I like milk in my coffee" and "I like sugar in my coffee".
Note that the order of the statements matters.

In Lojban, we operate with four truth functions, which we consider fundamental:

* A: TTTF (and/or)
* O: TFFT (if and only if)
* U: TTFF (whether or not)
* E: TFFF (and)

In this example, they would translate to something like: A: "Sugar and/or milk (just not black and unsweetened)"; O: "Either both milk and sugar, or none of the two"; U: "Milk, and I don't care about if there's sugar or not"; and E: "Milk and sugar, please".
A truth  function of "TTTT" (which is not among the fundamental ones) would mean "Whatever, any coffee will do".

In Lojban, you place the word for the truth function between the two bridi, selbri or sumti in question.
That word is called a logical connective.
The words for truth functions between sumti (and just for sumti!) are **.a**, **.o**, **.u** and **.e**.
How nice.
For instance: "I like dogs and cats" would be "mi nelci lo gerku .e lo mlatu".

Here are a few examples:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|mi .e do ba tavla|I will talk, and you will talk.|
|mi .o do ba tavla|I will talk, if and only if you will talk.|
|mi .u do ba tavla|I will talk, regardless of whether you talk.|
|mi .a do ba tavla|I will talk and/or you will talk.|

You can perhaps deduce that there are sixteen possible truth functions.
We will later see how to transform the four fundamental ones to obtain the other twelve.

Additionally, it is possible to logically connect not only sumti, but also selbri and even bridi.
This will also be covered in a future lesson.

### Practice

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button nearby!

Beware that exercises loop indefinitely, so feel free to stop once you feel you've had enough.
And be sure to revisit exercises on different days, to benefit from the spacing effect.
