### Negation 1

Sometimes, just saying what's the truth is not enough.
Often, we want to specify what's not the truth, and we do this by using negation.

Negation in English mostly involves "not", and is completely arbitrary and ambiguous.
We, as Lojbanists, can't have that, of course, so Lojban contains an elegant and unambigious system for negating.
<!--
What will be presented here are the official gold-standard rules. Disapproval of these "golden rules" concerning na is growing, and there is disagreement about what rule set should replace it. For now, I will stick with the official rules, and therefore, so will you, dear reader.
-->

#### Bridi negation

The first you need to know about is bridi negation, so called because it negates the bridi it's in, saying it's not true.
The way to negate a bridi is to place _na_ first in the sentence with a _ku_ after it, or just before the selbri.
The word _na_ has similar syntax to tenses (_pu_, _ca_, _ba_, etc).

Here is the definition:

<span class="definition-head">na</span> bridi contradictory negator; scope is an entire bridi; logically negates in some cmavo compounds.

Let's look at a few examples:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|mi na vecnu lo skami|<span class="spoiler-answer">It is not true that I sold the computer. &ndash; I did not sell the computer.</span>|
|na ku do gleki|<span class="spoiler-answer">It is not true that you are happy. &ndash; You are not happy.</span>|
|na ku lo prenu ku poi dunda lo skami ku'o pendo|<span class="spoiler-answer">It is not true that the person who donated the computer is friendly.</span>|

Note that the third sentece does not imply that someone donated a computer.
Maybe someone donated a computer, but that person is not friendly; or maybe no one donated anything at all!
Bridi negation only says that the entire bridi is false, and does not say anything about its subparts.
For this reason, bridi negation sometimes says too little, and scalar negation is preferred.

**Disclaimer**: what is presented here is a much simplified version of bridi negation.
According to the [CLL](https://mw.lojban.org/papri/The_Complete_Lojban_Language), it is indeed possible to negate only subparts of the bridi, by varying the position where _na_ is placed.
For pedagogical reasons we are not covering that, to avoid overloading you when there are more immediately useful concepts to be learned (such as scalar negation).
But please be mindful of this fact, and read [The Wave Lessons &ndash; Lesson 23: Negation](https://mw.lojban.org/papri/Lojban_Wave_Lessons/Single_page#Lesson_23:_Negation) and [CLL Chapter 15 &ndash; "No" Problems: On Lojban Negation](https://lojban.github.io/cll/15/1/) if and when you would like more details.

#### Scalar negation

In most cases where more specific negation is needed, people resort to a different method.
This method, called scalar negation, is an elegant and intuitive tool.
Using it, you effect only the selbri, since the words used in scalar negation bind to the selbri much like the word _se_.
Here are the definitions:

<span class="definition-head">na'e</span> contrary scalar negator: other than ...; not ...; a scale or set is implied.

<span class="definition-head">to'e</span> polar opposite scalar negator.

<span class="definition-head">no'e</span> midpoint scalar negator; "not really".

The name scalar negation is derived from the fact that the words which bind to the selbri can be placed along a scale from affirmation over negation and to stating that the opposite case is true.
These words are not negators in the same sense as _na_.
They do not state that a bridi is false, but make a positive statement that a bridi is true &ndash; the same bridi, but with a different selbri.
This distinction is mostly academic, though.
If, for example, I state that _mi na'e se nelci_, or "I am non-liked", I actually state that some selbri applies to me, which is also on a relevant scale with the selbri _nelci_.
Most of the time, we assume a scale where the positions are mutually exclusive (like love-like-dislike-hate), so _mi na'e se nelci_ implies _mi na se nelci_.

The words _no'e_ and _to'e_ should only be used when the selbri is placed on some obvious scale: _lo mi gerku cu to'e melbi_ &ndash; "My dog is ugly" makes sense, since we immediately know what the opposite of beautiful is.
On the other hand, _mi klama lo mi to'e zdani_ &ndash; "I go to my opposite thing of home", while grammatical, leaves the listener guessing what the speaker's opposite-home is and should be avoided.
You could say _mi klama lo mi na'e zdani_ however, and it would mean "I go to somewhere mine which is not home".

Let's look at some more examples:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|mi na'e ctuca|<span class="spoiler-answer">I do something other than teach.</span>|
|lo mi to'e pendo cu ctuca|<span class="spoiler-answer">My enemy is a teacher.</span>|
|mi no'e gleki|<span class="spoiler-answer">I am not really happy.</span>|
|xu do to'e gleki|<span class="spoiler-answer">Are you unhappy?</span>|

### Practice

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button nearby!

Beware that exercises loop indefinitely, so feel free to stop once you feel you've had enough.
And be sure to revisit exercises on different days, to benefit from the spacing effect.
