### Miscellaneous 1

This lesson is not about a general grammatical concept, but rather about two very specific words.
The reason we are dedicating an entire lesson to these two words is that they are very useful.

Here are their definitions:

<span class="definition-head">tu'a</span> extracts a concrete sumti from an unspecified abstraction; equivalent to le nu/su'u [sumti] co'e.

<span class="definition-head">jai</span> convert tense/modal (tagged) place to 1st place; 1st place moves to extra FA place (fai).

Let's start with _tu'a_.
It takes a sumti and converts it to another sumti &ndash; an elliptical abstraction which has something to do with the first sumti.
For example, I could say _mi djica lo nu mi citka lo plise_, or I could let it be up to context what abstraction about the apple I desire and just say _mi djica tu'a lo plise_.
One always has to guess what abstraction the speaker means by _tu'a SUMTI_, so it should only be used when context makes it easy to guess.

Let's look at a few more examples:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|mi djica tu'a do|I want [something about] you.|
|xu do cusku tu'a lo plise|Did you say [something about] apples?|
|do gasnu tu'a lo skami|You make the computer do something.|

See?
Very useful indeed.

What about _jai_?
It has two distinct, albeit related, meanings, depending on whether it is placed before **BAI** (sumtcita) or before a selbri.
In this lesson, we are only concerned with the simpler case of _jai_ before selbri.

In this case, _jai_ simply converts the selbri such that the sumti in the x_1 gets a _tu'a_ in front of it: _do jai mukti_ = _tu'a do mukti_.
In other words, it converts the selbri in a way such that it builds an elliptical abstraction from the sumti in the x_1, and then fills x_1 with the abstraction instead of the actual sumti.

This becomes more useful when combined with _lo_.
For example, _lo lerci_ means "some event which is late", but _lo jai lerci_ means "something late" (not necessarily an event).

<span class="definition-head">lerci</span> x_1 (event) is late by standard x_2.

Here are some examples:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|do jai lerci|You are late.|
|mi tavla do noi jai lerci|I am talking to you, who are late.|
|do jai mukti lo nu ctuca kei mi|[Something about] you motivates me to teach.|
|do jai se djica mi|I desire [something about] you.|

You may be tempted to rewrite the first and second examples as _do lerci_ and _do noi lerci_, respectively.
However, that is not possible: only an event (such as a person's arrival) can be late, not a person itself.
Indeed, it is in situations like this that _jai_ becomes useful.

Also, note that _do se jai djica mi_ would not work for the final example.
That would be equivalent to _mi jai djica do_, or _tu'a mi djica do_, which again does not make sense.

### Practice

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button nearby!

Beware that exercises loop indefinitely, so feel free to stop once you feel you've had enough.
And be sure to revisit exercises on different days, to benefit from the spacing effect.
