### Gadri 1

<!--If you have read and understood the content of all the lessons until now, you have amassed a large enough knowledge of Lojban so that it doesn't matter in which order you learn the rest.-->
<!--As a result, the order of the next lessons will be a mixture of sorted by increasing difficulty and sorted by importance in ordinary Lojban conversation.-->

<!--One of the biggest constrains on your speak now is your limited knowledge on how to make sumti.-->
<!--So far, you only know _ti_ and _lo SELBRI_, which doesn't take you far considering how important sumti are in Lojban.-->
<!--This lesson as well as the following two will be about the Lojban sumti.-->
<!--For now, we focus on the descriptive-like sumti, the ones made with articles like **lo**.-->

In Lojban, articles are called **gadri**, and all the ones discussed in this lesson are terminated by **ku**, except the combination _la CMEVLA_.
We will begin by describing three simple kinds of descriptive sumti, and then immediately find that they are not so simple after all:

<span class="definition-head">lo</span> gadri: generic, converts selbri to sumti.

<span class="definition-head">le</span> gadri: specific and descriptive, converts selbri to sumti.

<span class="definition-head">la</span> gadri: naming article, converts selbri or cmevla to sumti.

You are already familiar with **lo** and what it does.
It creates a sumti referring to what fits in the first place of the following selbri.

This may be contrasted with **le**, which is specific and descriptive.
Saying _le gerku_ says that you have one or more specific objects in mind, and you use the selbri _gerku_ to describe it, so that the listener may identify those specific objects.
This means that **le** has two important differences from **lo**.
Firstly, it cannot refer to objects in general, but always refers to specific objects.
Secondly, _le gerku_ explicitly hints that the selbri is only meant to help the speaker identify what the description refers to, whether or not it actually satisfies the selbri.
Perhaps the speaker is referring to a hyena, but is not familiar with them and thinks dog is a good enough approximation to be understood; that said, this non-veridicality is perhaps over-emphasized in many texts.
The best way to describe a dog is usually to describe it as being a dog, and unless there is a good reason not to, _le gerku_ is usually presumed to refer to something which is also _lo gerku_.

In translation, _lo gerku_ can be any of "the dog", "the dogs", "a dog", "some dogs", or dogs in general; while _le gerku_ is "the dog" or "the dogs".
Even better for _le gerku_ would be "the dog(s)".

Last of the three basic gadri, there is **la**, the naming gadri, which strips the following selbri of its usual meaning and refers to someone or something whose name is that selbri.
If I in English refer to a person called Innocent by her name, I neither describe her as being innocent, nor do I state that she is.
I only state that by convention, that object is referred to by that selbri or cmevla.
Note that, unlike any other gadri, **la** can convert not only selbri to sumti, but also cmevla to sumti.
Also, be cautious: other texts do not mention that names can be formed from ordinary selbri using the gadri **la**.
But those heretics must burn; selbri names are as good as they get, and many a proud Lojbanist have them.

**la** is a bit eccentric, since it always marks the beginning of a name.
Unlike the other gadri, anything that can be grammatically placed after **la** and its sisters is considered part of the name.
For example, _le mi gerku_ is "my dog", but _la mi gerku_ is someone or something called "My Dog".

#### Practice

Using this knowledge, attempt to translate the following sentences, using the most appropriate (and specific) gadri:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|John is an instructor.|<span class="spoiler-answer">la .djan. cu ctuca</span>|
|(Someone named) Cat is my friend.|<span class="spoiler-answer">la mlatu ku pendo mi</span>|
|Cats are beautiful.|<span class="spoiler-answer">lo mlatu ku melbi</span>|
|The cat is beautiful.|<span class="spoiler-answer">le mlatu ku melbi</span>|

Note that _lo mlatu ku melbi_ is also a perfectly valid translation for "The cat is beautiful".
It is just less specific, in that it could also mean (for example) "Cats are beautiful".

**Warning:** In translation exercises throughout this entire course, we do not distinguish between "lo" and "le".
This means that your answer will be accepted even if you use "le" in situations where only "lo" would be correct.
We followed this approach because specifying everywhere whether just _lo_ or both _le_ and _lo_ should be accepted would be too error prone and time consuming.
Just be aware of this fact, and keep in mind that if your answer using _le_ was accepted, that does not necessarily mean it was correct.

### Practice

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button nearby!

Beware that exercises loop indefinitely, so feel free to stop once you feel you've had enough.
And be sure to revisit exercises on different days, to benefit from the spacing effect.
