### Numbers 1

When learning a language, one of the things which are usually taught very early on is how to count.
This really makes little sense, because it's not necessary to know numbers if you don't know how to speak about those things to which they apply.
This is partly the reason why we have left it for lesson number twenty-two.
The other reason is that while the numbers themselves are easy to learn, how they apply to sumti can get very confusing indeed. That, however, we will save for a later lesson.

Before learning the words themselves, you should know that numbers do not have any internal grammar.
This means that any row of number words (henceforth referred to as a "number string") are treated identically to any other number string to the Lojban grammar, even if the string makes no sense.
Therefore, one can never answer unambiguously whether a number construct makes sense or not.
There are, however, intended ways of using the number words, and confusion will probably result if you deviate from the standard.

Learning all the number words of Lojban is way beyond the scope of this lesson, so you will only be introduced to what is normally used in text.
The wide range of Lojban mathematical cmavo are called mekso (Lojban for "mathematical expression"), and is widely disregarded because of its complexity and questionable advantage over so-called bridi math.

Let's begin with the ordinary Lojban numbers, from zero to nine:

|English|Lojban|
|-------|------|
|zero|no|
|one|pa|
|two|re|
|three|ci|
|four|vo|
|five|mu|
|six|xa|
|seven|ze|
|eight|bi|
|nine|so|

Notice how the vowels are alternating (with the exception of no), and how no consonant is used for two digits. In order to express numbers higher than nine, the numbers are just strung together:

* vo mu ci &ndash; four hundred and fifty three (453).
* pa no no no no &ndash; ten thousand (10 000).

Fractions are also useful to learn how to express. They are usually expressed via a decimal point, _pi_.

* pi &ndash; decimal point (or point in whichever base you are talking in).
* pa re pi re mu &ndash; twelve point two five (12.25).

Like in mathematics, when no number string is placed before or after _pi_, zero is assumed

There is also a range of number words which are not mathematically exact but rather subjective or relative.
The behaviors of these words are almost exactly like the behavior of digits, except they cannot be combined to make bigger numbers the way digits can:

|English|Lojban|
|-------|------|
|all|ro|
|almost all|so'a|
|most|so'e|
|many|so'i|
|some|so'o|
|few|so'u|
<!--|at least one|su'o|-->

### Practice

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button near the top of the page!

Beware that exercises loop indefinitely, so feel free to stop once you feel you've had enough.
And be sure to revisit exercises on different days, to benefit from the spacing effect.
