### Tenses 2

Tenses in lojban are a very broad subject, and we have only barely scratched the surface with _pu_, _ca_ and _ba_.
In this lesson, we will study the so-called **event contours**, which represent a very different way of viewing tenses than we have seen so far.
So let's get to it.

Using the tenses we have previously learned, we can imagine an indefinite time line, and we then place events on that line relative to the now.
With event contours, however, we view each event as a process, which has certain stages: a time before it unfolds, a time when it begins, a time when it is in process, a time when it ends, and a time after it has ended.
Event contours then tells us which part of the event's process was happening during the time specified by the other tenses.
We need a couple of tenses first:

<span class="definition-head">pu'o</span> sumtcita: event contour: bridi has not yet happened during SUMTI.

<span class="definition-head">ca'o</span> sumtcita: event contour: bridi is in process during SUMTI.

<span class="definition-head">ba'o</span> sumtcita: event contour: The process of bridi has ended during SUMTI.

This needs to be demonstrated by some examples.
What does _mi pu'o {ku} se zdani_ mean?
Answer: "I am about to have a home".

But hey, you might ask, why not just say _mi ba {ku} se zdani_ and even save a syllable?
Because, remember, saying that you will have a home in the future says nothing about whether you have a home now.
Using _pu'o_, though, you say that you are in the past of the process of you having a home, which means that you don't have one now.

Note, by the way, that _mi ba {ku} se zdani_ is similar to _mi pu'o {ku} se zdani_, and likewise with _ba'o_ and _pu_.
Why do they seem reversed?
Because event contours view the present as seen from the viewpoint of the process, whereas the other tenses view events as seen from the present.

Let's see a few more examples:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|do pu'o citka lo plise|You are in the past of the process of eating an apple &ndash; You are about to eat an apple.|
|do ca'o gleki|You are in the present of the process of being happy &ndash; You are currently happy.|
|do ba'o tavla lo ctuca|You are in the future of the process of talking to the instructor &ndash; You have finished talking to the instructor.|

There is some semantic intersection with _pu_, _ca_ and _ba_, of course.
But event contours are often more precise than other kind of tenses.

The event contours above describe time intervals.
But there are also some event contours to describe point-like stages in the process, such as its beginning.
As with _ca_, they actually extend slightly into the past and future of that point.

The two most important point-like event contours are:

<span class="definition-head">co'a</span> sumtcita: event contour: bridi is at its beginning during SUMTI.

<span class="definition-head">co'u</span> sumtcita: event contour: bridi is at its ending during SUMTI.

Let's see some examples:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|do co'a citka lo plise|You in the right at the beginning of the process of eating an apple &ndash; You just started eating an apple.|
|do co'u tavla lo ctuca|You are right at the end of the process of talking to the instructor &ndash; You just finished talking to the instructor.|

Finally, it is also possible to combine event contours with _pu_, _ca_ and _ba_:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|do ba pu'o citka lo plise|In the future, you will be about to about to eat an apple.|
|do pu co'u tavla lo ctuca|In the past, you had just finished talking to the instructor.|

Don't worry too much about it right now though, we will learn more about how compound tenses work later on.
They are actually quite intuitive, and mimic an imaginary journey starting from the tenses on the left and going to the right.

### Practice

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button nearby!

Beware that exercises loop indefinitely, so feel free to stop once you feel you've had enough.
And be sure to revisit exercises on different days, to benefit from the spacing effect.
