### Gadri 2

<!-- TODO: Review content -->

The three basic gadri &ndash; _lo_, _le_ and _la_ &ndash; can be expanded with three more:

<span class="definition-head">loi</span> gadri: generic, mass of individuals.

<span class="definition-head">lei</span> gadri: specific and descriptive, mass of individuals.

<span class="definition-head">lai</span> gadri: mass of named individuals.

These are the same as the first three articles in all aspects except for one: they wrap the sumti into masses.
Masses are used to abstract multiple individuals into single entities for ease of expression.
For example, a football team can be described as a mass of its members, or an animal as a mass of cells.

Consider the following example:

<span class="definition-head transient">mivysle</span> x_1 is a biological cell of organism x_2.

<span class="definition-head transient">remna</span> x_1 is a human.

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|loi mivysle cu remna|Masses of cells are humans.|

Again, none of the cells are humans.
Indeed, the cells have very few human traits, but the cells considered as a whole make up a human.
This example also shows that the selbri following _loi_ must be satisfied by the members of the mass, but not by the mass itself: a human isn't a cell either.

<!-- TODO: think more about this -->
It needs to be noted that regular sumti built using _lo_ are usually sufficient even when a selbri is meant to apply collectively.
Constructing masses is mainly necessary when talking about multiple groups of individuals.

<span class="definition-head transient">sruri</span> x_1 flanks/encircles/encloses x_2 in line/plane/directions x_3.

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|lo prenu cu sruri lo zdani|People surround the house.|

This Lojban sentence shares the obvious meaning of the English one, namely that people are arranged around the house, not necessarily that individual people are stretched around it.
But what if we want to explicitly say that people surround the house from head to toe?
<!--
TODO: would it be correct to add: "In other words, by default descriptive sumti using **lo..ku**, **le..ku** and **la..ku** can be applied either collectively or distributively."?
--> That is possible as well, but will only be covered in a future lesson.
<!--
But what if we want to explicitly say that people surround the house from head to toe? In order to be explicit about a selbri distributing across individuals, one needs _lo_, _le_ or _la_ with an outer quantifier.
The subject of quantifiers will be discussed later.
-->

Let's see a few more examples:

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|loi ctuca cu na prenu|A mass of instructors is not a person.|
|ma cmene lei fanva|What is the name of the mass of translators?|
|lai .djan. djuno fi lo bangu|The Johns know about languages.|

Lastly, there are the (only two) generalizing gadri:

<span class="definition-head">lo'e</span> gadri: veridical convert selbri to sumti. Sumti refers to the archetype of _lo SELBRI_.

<span class="definition-head">le'e</span> gadri: descriptive convert selbri to sumti. Sumti refers to the described/perceived archetype of _le SELBRI_.

Of which there is no _la_-equivalent.

So, what is actually meant by the archetype?
For _lo'e mlatu_, it is an ideal, imagined cat, which has all the properties which best exemplifies cats.
It would be wrong to say that this includes being white, since a big systematic subgroup of the members of the set of cats do not have white color.
Likewise, the typical person does not live in Asia even though a lot of them do.
However, if sufficiently many persons have a trait, for instance being able to speak, we can say:

<span class="definition-head">kakne</span> = x_1 is capable of doing/being x_2 under circumstance x_3.

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|lo'e remna cu kakne lo nu tavla|The typical human being can speak.|

What about _le'e_?
Well, it is the ideal object as perceived or described by the speaker.
This need not be factually correct, and is often translated as the stereotype, even though the English expression has some unpleasant negative connotations, which the Lojban one does not.
In fact, everyone has a stereotypical archetypichal image of any category.
In other words, _lo'e mlatu_ is the archetype which best exemplifies all _lo mlatu_, while the archetype _le'e mlatu_ best exemplifies all _le mlatu_.

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|le'e remna cu gleki|The stereotypical human is happy.|

#### Summary

The eleven gadri can be seen in the diagram below.

||Generic|Masses|Generalizing|
|-|------|------|------------|
|veridical|lo|loi|lo'e|
|descriptive|le|lei|le'e|
|name|la|lai|n/a|

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button near the top of the page!
