### Quantifying sumti 1

**Disclaimer:** This lesson, as well as the remaining lessons covering sumti quantification (to be written), are highly experimental.
Sumti quantification is a notoriously difficult subject to teach, and for more advanced uses there is even disagreement among experienced Lojbanists regarding what approach is best, resulting in a few different language variants.
In this course, we intend to provide a high level overview of the fundamental concepts for everyday conversation, hopefully in a way which is compatible with the most commonly spoken variants of modern Lojban.
But we are still actively working towards that, and there is no guarantee that the current version of these lessons is consistent.
If you are an experienced Lojbanist, please help us improve these lessons (and, of course, any other lessons as well).

Okay, let's get started.
We covered numbers in a previous, isolated lesson.
How can we use them to quantity things?

Take a description sumti such as _lo prenu ku_.
There are two possible locations where we could place a number, such as _re_ ("two"): _re lo prenu ku_ and _lo re prenu ku_.
The first location, as in _re lo prenu ku_, is called an **outer quantifier**, because the quantifier (in this case, _re_) is outside of **lo..ku**.
The second location, as in _lo re prenu ku_, is called an **inner quantifier**.

Both types of quantifiers somehow connect the number _re_ to the sumti _lo prenu ku_, but outer quantifiers are somewhat more complex, and hence will only be explained in a future lesson.
In this lesson, we will concern ourselves with inner quantifiers only.

So, what does _lo re prenu ku_ means?
Well, it roughly means "two persons" or "the two persons".
More precisely, _re_ in _lo re prenu ku_ provides more information compared to just _lo prenu ku_, by indicating that the number of people involved is two; not one, not three, but exacly two.
In modern Lojban, this is generally taken to mean that, sure, the could be lots of people in the universe, but in this particular context we are talking about only two of them.

What about the difference between _lo re prenu_ and _le re prenu_?
As previously mentioned, _le_ indicates that the speaker has a particular person or persons in mind, so _le re prenu_ would generally be translated as "the two persons".
On the other hand, _lo re prenu_ could be translated as "two persons" or "the two persons".

Let's see a few more examples:

<span class="definition-head transient">basti</span> x_1 replaces/substitutes x_2 for/instead of x_3 in circumstance x_4; x_1 is a replacement/substitute.

<span class="definition-head transient">bombila</span> x_1 is a light bulb.

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|lo re prenu cu kakne lo nu basti lo bombila|Two persons are capable of replacing a light bulb.|
|xu do vecnu le re skami|Did you sell the two computers?|
|le panopa gerku cu melbi|The 101 dogs are beautiful.|

So far, so good. But what happens when you quantify more than one sumti in a single bridi?

|Sentence|Possible translation|
|--------|-----------|
|lo re prenu cu dunda lo ci gerku|Two persons donated three dogs.|

Just like the English version, this sentence is actually quite vague.
For example, it does not distinguish between the following possible scenarios:

1. Maybe there were two persons and each person had three dogs. In this case, a total of 6 dogs were donated.
2. Maybe there were two persons and these two persons _together_ donated a total of three dogs.
   1. Maybe the first person donated one dog and the second person donated two dogs, independently.
   2. Maybe the two persons shared ownership of all three dogs, and they collectively donated them all.

We will later see how to be more specific, for situations where context alone is not enough to narrow down the meaning.

### Practice

As usual, before proceeding to the next lesson, get some practice with interactive exercises &ndash; look for the "Practice" button nearby!

Beware that exercises loop indefinitely, so feel free to stop once you feel you've had enough.
And be sure to revisit exercises on different days, to benefit from the spacing effect.
